>> My name is Ned Holbrook and I'm a software engineer
working on text layout at Apple, so let's get started.
So this morning we are talking about several things.
We decided to plan this session with
sort of a variety of the groups in mind.
So, if you're coming to the Mac OS X platform from say
Windows, then you'll see that we've interspersed some sort
of signposts throughout so you can kind of
get your bearings with Core Text relative
to what you've been working with on Windows.
Also, if you have come to our Core
Text session last year, then you'll --
we've tried to beef things up a bit by showing
you a bit more about how Core Text interacts
in a real world application with other frameworks and so
that's kind of what we're going to be doing this morning.
I would start off by saying that,
if you haven't done so already,
I highly recommend taking a look at
our Core Text session from last year.
We're going to start off with an overview of Core Text but
it's nowhere near as detailed as the presentation we gave
at WWDC06 but those slides and that talk are available
online so, if you haven't done so, go ahead and look that up
at some point and you'll see a very
detailed overview of Core Text in Leopard.
But we're going to start off by giving you a
quick overview so we can remind ourselves of some
of the terms that we're going to be using.
Then we're going to talk more generally about text and
fonts on Mac OS X and best practices for dealing with those.
We're going to spend particular attention with
drawing, inputting and some minutia about saving text
and font information in documents and, of course, this
is a hands on session so, if you haven't done so already,
please go ahead and access the session website for Session
127 and there's a download called Core Text Arc Hands On
and we are actually going to be walking
through that sample application as we go.
So -- so if -- if you are looking for something else, I'll
point out that this afternoon there's a Cocoa text session
that goes into some amount of detail in
extending the Cocoa text system and in particular
if you're Mac OS X application programmer who's
dealt with QuickDraw or ATSUI and are interested
in how you might convert Core Text in your application,
then there's also a session this afternoon
following the Cocoa session about making the switch,
but I'll assume that we have all of our hands on projects
ready and let's go ahead and get started by taking a look
at the application that we're going
to be working with and so to do so I'd
like to bring Nathan Taylor on stage, Nathan.
>> Thanks, Ned, can we switch to demo one, please.
All right.
So this is where we're going to start. I'm going
to show you a quick look at this application
that we've put together for the hands on.
If you've downloaded the hands on material you'll
see that I have it broken down into six steps,
and I'm just going to give you a start by letting
you see what the finished product looks like here.
So let's run this guy and as you can see we
have an application and we're using Core Text
to draw text along an arc in the application, you know,
the drawing and the rotations are all graphical operations
and you'll see that when you look at the code.
This is also a live application
with all the niceties you'd expect
for the user interaction, so we
have live update of the text.
If I type here, we update live.
I have interactions with font control, so I have these bold
and italic check boxes and you notice we update them based
on the status of the font, and I also have integration
with the font panel so the user can change the font
and even support multiple Windows with live updates of
fonts and, if we have time, I'll show you these options
that I have hooked up here at the end that use
some of the Core Text details to, you know,
detect when we substitute fonts, you know,
draw glyph metrics and draw line metrics.
With that I hope you've downloaded the
demonstration and I'll hand the session back
over to Ned to give you the Core Text overview.
>> Thanks, Nathan, could we switch back to slides.
Great. So like I mentioned, we're going
to start off by giving a quick rundown
of the talk we gave at our session last year.
So this is one of the slides that I pulled up, this
is kind of the tech marketing speak about Core Text
but what I wanted to do instead of going through these
points again because you have access to those slides,
is to go ahead and just -- just refresh
your mind as to what Core Text actually is.
For Windows programers in the audience you can
think of Core Text as being similar to Uniscribe
and that is what it does is Unicode Text Layout and some
font management. So Unicode Text Layout essentially means
that in Unicode rather than having a one-to-one mapping from
characters to glyphs, we have a many-to-many relationship
and so the process of Unicode Text Layout then
is the process of converting from characters,
the numeric representation of text, into positioned glyphs.
Glyphs, of course, being the graphical atoms in a
font that are used to render text and so when we talk
about text layout it's that process of conversion
from text and some style information to glyphs
and their positions relative to one another.
And Core Text also includes a great set
of utilities for working with fonts.
So let's go ahead and talk about very briefly the major
classes that you're going to deal with in Core Text.
The highest level one and the one that for
many tasks is sufficient is the Framesetter
and the Framesetter is responsible
for filling frames with text.
So essentially you have a box and
you want to put some text in it.
Usually this could be multiple paragraphs of text.
You could have multiple styles, anything you want.
You can even flow text from one frame to the next, the frame
being the object that is created to hold these text boxes
and so in order to do so the Framesetter
makes use of a class called the Typesetter.
Now primarily the Typesetter is responsible
for the actual text layout process,
that conversion to glyphs I was talking about, but another
crucial feature that it offers and one that's essential
for something like the Framesetter or yourself
is determining where line breaks are in text.
So you can think of text as having been laid out into a
giant line of text and for each line that you're going
to draw you're going to see how much text is going to fit in
a certain width and you're going to then use the Typesetter
after it's suggested a line break to you to create a line,
and a line is pretty much self-explanatory
it's a line of text.
It can be of multiple styles and directions of text and the
line is comprised of a series of glyph runs and each one
of these glyph runs contains those
positioned glyphs grouped by style.
So when a run is drawn either by yourself or by Core Text,
you can be assured that the graphic style that you're going
to use in order to render those glyphs is
the same for every glyph in a particular run.
So now that we have our overview of Core Text in hand, a
good refresh from last year, let's jump straight to drawing.
Now the reason I want to do this is because Core
Text, of course, is tied intimately to Quartz
which is the graphics rendering mechanism for Mac OS X.
It's used pervasively and so I thought especially for people
who were coming from a Window perspective we
might as well just give a quick overview of how
to think about text with regards to Quartz.
So the major differences from other graphic systems
are, of course, primarily coordinate spaces.
Quartz offers freely transformable coordinate
spaces which is a great convenience to have
since it's a resolution independent graphics mechanism
and so you can think of those as being GDI mapping modes
in that you have your pick of, you know, the mapping
from your coordinate system to the actual display.
Now there's two common orientations that we use
on Mac OS X, we call them normal and flipped.
Normal, of course, is positive "y" going
up and flipped is positive "y" going down.
So, if you've dealt with other raster
graphic packages such as GDI on Windows or QuickDraw
on the Mac you may think that the flipped
coordinate system is the most natural but in Quartz we tend
to use the normal coordinate system which is
the default coordinate system unlike the flipped
which corresponds roughly to MM
text used by GDI but keep in mind
that the coordinate spaces are
remappable; you have your choice.
So we tend to think of things in normal but you
can do whatever you want but just keep this in mind
because you may run into situations where
things go the other way and, of course,
within that same frame of measurement all of your
measurements are floating point all the time.
This corresponds quite closely to GDI+
on Windows which also uses real coordinates
for measurement. This is incredibly handy when you're
dealing with resolution independence you can, of course,
go straight to PDF or print or whatever and you have
the same coordinate system that you are dealing with,
but I will just point out that being floating
point there are some bugaboos that may apply
that don't necessarily apply when dealing with
integer map on a computer so keep that in mind.
And then I also wanted to give a quick overview of the
line and glyph metrics that we tend to use in Core Text
and Quartz and also the Cocoa text
system and other parts of the system.
You'll see in this diagram that we have on
the slide here there are two different types
of metrics; we have line metrics and glyph metrics.
The line metrics are indicated in that orangish yellow
color and the glyph metrics are in the white color.
And the -- the -- along the left side of the diagram
here these are the primary line measurements that we talk
about when dealing with individual lines of
text, the ascent, the descent and the baseline.
The baseline typically doesn't get a measurement of its own
but the relationship between the baseline and the ascent,
of course, is the ascent measurement and then the difference
between the baseline and the descent is the descent value.
When you're dealing with multiple lines of text and
trying to figure out how they are placed relative
to one another other, you quite frequently encounter
the leading as well that is in the lower right
and that's an additional amount of space
that's added typically between lines.
Then common glyph metrics we refer to the advance width --
I say the advance width although sometimes we do shorten it
to advance, but I say advance width here because
technically advance is a two dimensional measurement
in that you could have a shift
vertically between adjacent glyphs
but this advance width is the distance
you would conceptually move to get
from one glyph to the next in a sequence.
And then along the right we have a couple other
information data points, cap height and x height,
these are less frequently used but especially in a graphics
context when you might be looking at doing some sort
of vertical positioning of text these can come in handy.
The reason I've separated them into line and glyph metrics
all of the line metrics correspond to individual fonts
but in Core Text we group those so that, when
you request those measurements from a line,
we give you an aggregate value so it's appropriate for
all of the different fonts in the line and all of the rest
of the information, of course, can be gotten from fonts
directly and typically don't correspond to a line as a whole.
And so with that admittedly brief overview, let's go
ahead and actually start drawing some text so, Nathan.
>> All right.
Please switch to demo one.
Thanks, Ned.
So what we have here is the start of the
Core Text Arc application and I'm starting
with a Carbon application template from
Xcode and we're going to add things to it.
As you see I already have some stubs for
some implementation files and headers
and I also have a nib laid out at the beginning of step one.
So let's take a look at this nib,
it defines our user interface
and as you can see this is the basic layout of the window.
We've got the HIView subclass that's
going to do our ArcView drawing
and we have the check boxes and
text field for user controls.
So to implement this we need to implement the ArcView
subclasses and HIView subclass and so I'm going to open
up ArcView.h here and declare some things.
So let me drop in the declarations we need.
Now this is the basic HIView subclassing stuff.
We have our class registration and everything else.
What we're going to want to pay key attention to,
when I implement it, is the ArcViewDraw method here.
This is what's going to do the drawing and this
is where we're going to use Core Text heavily.
So we save that.
I'm going to switch to the implementation file
with the counterpart button here and
drop in our initial implementation.
All right.
Now look at the implementation and let's take
a look at some of the functions we have here.
Basically, we have ArcViewCreate which is the
constructor for our HIView subclass and this is just setting
up a structure that we have defined and of key interest
is, you know, we need a default font to get started
so ArcViewCreateDefaultFont is our
first call we make to Core Text in here.
We use CTFont, create with name give him the
default name and size and this will create a font
that we'll use for our initial rendering.
Below that we see ArcViewCreateWithString or
CreateAttributedString, sorry let me jump to that here
and this is what's setting up the string that we're going
to draw and what we're doing is we're going to build
up an AttributedString from a default
string and we're going to add our font to it.
Those of you that are a student and are looking at the
code notice we have two attributes that we're using here.
We also have the ligature attribute and we're going
to intentionally going to specify that to be zero
to disable all ligature processing because drawing text
on an arc with ligatures isn't going to flow very well,
so this is one of the tricks you
might want to take out from this talk.
So we're going to create a dictionary with
our attributes and then given our string,
we'll use CFAttributedStringCreate with our
string from the ArcView and these attributes
and now that we have our AttributedString
let's go to where we do our drawing.
I'll scroll this up a little bit so you can see.
So now we'll putting this drawing
together like you would in any application.
We're going to get someone to draw first and
then we'll worry about making into an arc.
So the first thing we need to do is
we're going to set-up our context
and as Ned mentioned we have flipped
and normal transforms on our context.
HIView deals in the flipped context and for our purposes
here we want a normal context, so I'm going to translate
and scale the CTM appropriately so we can draw and then
I'm going to use our method to create our AttributedString
and then the next we'll use
CTLineCreateWithAttributedString
with our AttributedString to create a line object.
Now for this first step that's all we're
going to need to draw is our CTLine,
as you'll see we'll call CTLineDraw
after setting the text position.
It's important to note that Core Text will always draw the
line at the text position and as Ned may have mentioned
that corresponds to the baseline
of the font metrics line metrics.
So before we can actually get this to run, we need to do
one more thing and that's to actually register the class,
so let's drop in this one line to register our subclass
here before we do anything else very imperative
and we will build this and go and there
we go we're drawing our default text
with the default font Dito
we specified and it doesn't do much else yet.
So let's now take the next step, step two if you're
following along and get this thing drawing along the arc
and all we're really going to do for this one is open up
ArcView.c and we're going to replace the implementation
for ArcViewDDraw with an updated one
-- and I love how this jumps around --
and there we go we'll save that off and I'll take
a quick look at it and walk you through again.
So pretty much what we're doing here is the same.
We still create the line the way we did, but now
we have two nested four loops if you'll notice.
The first one is going to walk the runs in the line so that
there is CT run so, if there are multiple runs as you saw
in the fully featured app we had two different fonts
split up into three runs, so this will iterate the runs
and then as we go through the runs we're going
to iterate the glyphs and create a glyph range.
We're going to draw glyphs one glyph at a time applying
a graphical transform to do the rotation of the glyphs,
get it to draw on our arc and then
we'll just call CTRunDraw
with the single glyph, glyph range
to draw in our context here.
So, if we build and run this now, we should draw on our
arc and so for now the app is drawing how we want it to do
but now we need to get feedback from the user and with
that I'm going to let Ned tell you how to do text input.
Switch to slides, please.
>> Thanks, Nathan.
Things are really starting to perk up here.
So, Nathan brought up a good point and I just want
to touch on that before I move on to my next slide.
He mentioned that the origin of text is on the baseline and
that's a very good point and one that I forgot to mention
in my previous slide about metrics. That's a
common convention using the baseline as the origin
for both Core Text and Quartz, of course, Cocoa which uses
-- makes use of both technologies internally often refers
to the rectangle of a line of text or fragment of text
and so in that case they would actually place the origin
at the ascent of the line of text but otherwise
metrics should be consistent throughout the system.
So that was just the one point I wanted to make.
So -- so you've got something drawing now, but
you probably noticed it was pretty obvious --
he spelled default text out there on the screen that
we don't really have it hooked up to anything yet.
We're going to need to get some text in and so
there's two types of text we don't want to deal with,
first of all we're going to want to replace that default
string with something that's a bit more localizable
that is we're probably going to want to import this
fantastic application to other markets throughout the world
or whatever and so we might want to be able to
specify something for our different markets something
in Japanese, something in German whatever, and we're
also going to want to eventually take a user input and,
of course, for both these tasks we're going to need a
quick overview of strings and so it goes without saying,
but I'll say it anyway Mac OS X uses Unicode.
This is a far cry from having to worry about the
A and W variance of Windows where you're dealing
with code pages in the A and Unicode in the W versions.
There used to be a long, long time ago pre Mac
OS X the requirement of using the Script Manager
which is kind of a code page system of its own.
Code pages are incredibly unwieldy, they're
completely impractical for dealing with real text,
Japanese for instance couldn't really make use of a script
for modern Japanese and so the Script Manager is fairly,
pretty, completely deprecated and so which is great
because we have Unicode to solve all of our needs for us.
So it does make things a lot simpler especially
when you keep in mind that we have a handful
of system wide classes available to
you for dealing with Unicode strings.
There is, of course, CFString and NSString.
You'll note on the slide I have that double headed
arrow there between the two that's my way of indicating
that these classes are toll-free bridged so CFString,
of course, lives in Core Foundation which is a
"C" procedural API for this functionality but
there's also the NSString class in Foundation
which is a different syntax for using strings but both of
these classes can be used interchangeably with the methods
or functions on the other, so it's largely a syntactic
difference but all of this functionality is available
to you both at a very low level and at a
more convenient level and then built on top
of those string classes are the AttributedStrings and so
Nathan already made use of one of these in our sample code
and you can think of an AttributedString as being the
array of characters in your string and then parallel
to that we have an array of attributes that specifies
the style corresponding to a particular characters
in that string and so in Nathan's example he set a
font and another attribute for disabling ligatures
but there are other attributes available to you both through
Core Text and a wide variety available to you through Cocoa.
So these strings -- these AttributedStrings are the
primary input to Core Text as they carry both the text
and the style that we're required to render it.
The CF and NSString classes also offer a wide
variety of utilities including converting to
and from other well known encodings, so I encourage
you to make use of these extensively as does Mac OS X.
So the first type of string I mentioned is that
localizable text and so there's two different primary types
of localizable text, the first most
common one that you would think about
and one that we have been using throughout already is in
resources either attached to view or control of some sort
and so, when Nathan had check boxes and everything, that
text was actually stored in a nib file which, of course,
makes is easy to localize so for text that is
localizable text that is attached to a view
in your user interface definition then a nib file
is a preferred mechanism for keeping track of that.
Also we have strings resource files this is
appropriate when you're dealing with text-only resources
that is not necessarily attached to a
particular view but this is something
that we're going to make use of in the very next demo.
In order to show you how we can use some text that
we haven't created in Interface Builder itself
in a nib we're going to want to be able to use in
our application and localize at some future point.
So but the most exciting type of text input, of course,
is going to be the text that you get from the user
and so there's a wide variety of functionality
that's offered by system-defined control
and view classes the primary one being, of course, Unicode.
You don't have to worry about, you know, what language or
whatever your user is interacting with in order to get text
in through one of these controls
or views into your application.
In particular the system defined classes
and views offer support for input methods.
This is incredibly useful as there
are many languages used on Mac OS X
that the keyboard isn't really appropriate by itself.
You might want to have some graphical or typing base
mechanism for constructing the text that you're going
to input in a view and the system defined classes take care
of the input method integration for you which is great.
And finally the system defined classes
also offer user interface consistency.
We're very concerned about consistency of
usability throughout the system and so by using one
of these system classes, of course, you're guaranteed that
the most appropriate mechanisms are used for interacting
with text the most appropriate display and paradigms.
So you should definitely make one of
these classes wherever possible not just
because it makes your life a whole lot easier
but also because it's what your users expect.
So there's a variety of classes and views that
are available, the most common ones I've indicated
on the slide are in Carbon, HITextView and MLTE, the
later being appropriate for large amounts of text such as
in a Text Editor of some sort and HITextView offering
either static or that's a static text or text controls
and then there's also Cocoa which offers its own set
of views, the most commonly used are NSTextField
for user interface interaction at the control level and
NSTextView which is appropriate for large amounts of text.
So we encourage you to make use of these, of course,
we're going to not be able to use one of these
for drawing our text, but we're certainly going to make
use of one of these for getting the text from the user
and that's exactly what Nathan is going
to do over on the demo machine right now.
>> Thank you.
All right.
So this is where we left off, we are basically
drawing static text on an arc and that's great
but this is an application that the user is going
to run so I'm going to show you in this next step --
step three if you're following along how we're going to get
default text in and then live text input and for the sake
of having some code to demonstrate I'm going
on get the default text from the strings file.
It's still just a little bit of code rather
than from a nib file because that's no code.
But, so let's take a look at this, and I'll get started
here so I'm going to open up control.h here and I am going
to drop in some of the text field utilities, the
declarations for these guys, so as you can see I put
in two functions here that I'm going to define,
InitializeTextField, this is going to be called when we open
up a window and it's going to grab the string from
the strings file and send it to our text field
and then Update Text which is going to
be responsible for extracting the string
from the text field and applying it to our ArcView.
Now jump to the implementation file of this and
let's drop in the implementations of these guys,
and we'll take a look at what we got. So initializeTextField
here is really quite simple. All we're going
to do is call the CFCopyLocalizeString
macro and having this
in there handles all the interactions
with the appropriate strings files.
There's several of these macros that allow you a little
bit more control over how your strings are organized and,
if you're writing a Cocoa application, there
are equivalent NS localize string macros.
Now just using this is not enough to
get the strings file in your code.
You need to use one of developer tools
called genstrings let me jump to the project
and I'll show you what the string looks like. genstrings
will when you pass your source files will parse those
and create appropriate strings files and then, once you have
the strings files, you can as necessary, edit the strings
and your localizers can create copies
of these for other localizations.
As you see our now default string will have some
Unicode text with some Japanese text interspersed
with the English text as you saw
in the original application.
So that's the strings file and that's how we're
going to get the strings file out and all we're going
to simply do is set it to our text field.
Now update text is the one responsible
for grabbing the text from control
and there really isn't any Core Text specific --
anything really specific here this is
standard HIView stuff we're just going
to grab the text and assign it to our ArcView.
So with that in mind let's hook up
the application event handlers --
or the Window Event Handler in this case for these guys.
First thing I'm going to do is drop in a new
implementation of HandleNew which is the event handler
for creating a new window and just quickly walk you
through this -- see if we can jump to the top here.
What I've added are the control events that
we're interested in handling and then I am going
to set-up a ControlEventHandler for those events and
I'm going on use my Window Event Handler for convenience
and before we show the window I'll
initialize the text field and update the text.
That should be there.
You know what let me do that again
because I dragged the wrong one in.
I want this to compile for you guys, so now we'll go to the
Window Event Handler and put in the new Window Event Handler
and then we'll take a quick look at what
we're doing for the TextField Event Case.
So this is where we're handling the events from our text
field control and, you know, we're going to respond to two
of them, the TextAccepted and the TextDidChange event.
The TextEventAccepted is going to be good for getting the
input at the end when the user hits the carriage return,
but we want live input and live feedback here, so
we're going to listen for the text to change event also
and to handle this properly -- and
it's actually fairly well documented,
we want to look for the unconfirmed range parameter.
If that parameter is present, that means there's an
unconfirmed range of text usually from an input method
and in that case we're going to bypass update
the text and wait for that to be confirmed.
So let's take a look and see what this does, I'll build it.
Now you can see we have our default text pulled in
from the strings file assigned to our text input field
and the ArcView and live update I
was telling you about is now working
and so let's show you what would happen
-- what happens with the input method.
So I'll switch to the Hirigana input method --
and I apologize if there are Japanese
speakers here, if I mess anything up, I'm not.
So I'm going to try and type something
and notice I'm not updating
yet because technically there's still an unconfirmed range
and once I confirm that, we'll update the view of the text.
And this is what we sort of desire for live update behavior.
So now that we're getting text into the application
both from a strings file and from user input,
the next thing we're going to want to do is move on
to step four and, you know, hook up the fonts window,
but before I do that let Ned tell you about fonts.
Slides.
>> Thank you very much.
So we're going to need to talk about fonts.
As Nathan said we've already been making use of our
default font, but now it's time to actually get real
and let our user select some fonts for
using -- for use in their document.
So first let's get an overview of fonts on Mac OS X, so
there's two primary classes that you're going to want
to make use of when dealing with fonts, there's the font
which is a specific graphic instance that's used to render
in a particular case and then there's a descriptor and
a descriptor you can think of as being a loose match
to a font or kind of like a search query.
So this is something that can be used to either
uniquely identify a particular font by its attributes
or it can be something that you can use to basically
find the most appropriate font on a particular system.
Now Windows programers have already made this distinction --
are used to making this distinction by both having a font
instance in the form of an HFONT and a font descriptor
of sorts being a LOGFONT structure and so it's --
it's a very common distinction to be made
so a descriptor allows you to say something
like I want a serif font instead of saying well I want
this particular serif font, you can say well I want a font
that has these particular attributes
and handles that mapping for you.
So, of course, as with strings we also have toll-free
bridged classes for dealing with these classes as well.
What you see on the slide is a rough overview of both CTFont
and CTFontDescriptor being in Core Text and available
at a very low level to you and NSFont and NSFontDescriptor
their bridged counterparts which are available
through the applicant framework and so is
available with a different syntax but, of course,
those classes are toll-free bridged so you can
use the two interchangeably and then at the --
at the very bottom of this diagram you can also see
the implementation of these classes which, of course,
are based on CGFont which is the Quartz font instance
and under the hood ATSFont which roughly corresponds
to a particular font file or font container on disk.
These are, of course, the implementation you
typically don't want to use one of these classes.
It's much easier to make use of the higher level
classes but if for some reason you do need to access one
of those lower level classes Core Text
allows you access to both of those.
So that's how fonts work.
Now we're going to need to figure out in some cases
what font in particular we're going to be dealing
with from a user perspective, of course,
as an application you should prefer
to use the font panel sometimes called the fonts window in
user interface parlance for letting a user select fonts.
It used to be the -- the normal mode to have a big
menu with all of your fonts and everything well,
it's not really what users expect these days on OS X.
The font panel offers a lot more flexibility when dealing
with fonts other than just that single long listing and
lets you access many of the attributes in a particular font
and so, in particular, in Leopard we've enhanced the
capabilities of the font panel interface for Carbon
to allow you to access a font descriptor for the user font
selections, this is a great boon for anyone who has had
to deal with integrating font panel
into a Carbon application
because the font descriptor makes it virtually painless to
apply the newly updated attributes from the user selection
to the font panel to the particular
font that you're using in a document.
So that's a great new addition in Leopard and
one that Nathan is going to make use of and then,
if you do need to enumerate all of the fonts on a particular
system, of course, there is also a CTFontCollection class,
and we gave an example of using that in our slides
last year and so that is also available to you.
So with that in mind, let's go ahead
and actually hook up to the font panel
as Nathan is going to show you on the demo machine.
Thanks.
>> Thanks, Ned.
So, hooking up to the font panel
is really fairly simple, you know,
it could be you can think it's fairly
complex especially if you've tried to do it
in other Carbon applications using ATSUI or even QuickDraw.
We've added some functionality to the font panel to support
Core Text font descriptors and you'll find that using those
with the font panel a lot easier, and I'm
going to show you that in a few minutes.
First thing is I want to show you how to display a font
panel for your application and our preferred way is for you
to add a format menu for your application where you'll
format fonts and format text in your application.
In this case all we really care about are fonts.
As you can see in the nib I have a format menu
defined and I have a show fonts menu item.
What I've done to the menu item is the menu
item has the command SHFP and that corresponds
to the standard constant KHI show/hide fonts panel and,
if you define this with a menu item or a control to send
that command and let that command filter through your
application, the standard event handler will show
or hide the fonts panel depending on the current state.
You may want to make note of that event when it is issued so
that you can do certain things such as update the font panel
which we do in this application or
update your menu which we also do,
and I'll show you in one of the later -- in the next step.
So that's a look at the code.
We'll get out of Interface Builder
here and go back to Xcode.
So to hook up to the fonts panel I'm mostly going to
be interacting with the fonts.h and .c files here,
so we'll open fonts.h and as we've been doing I'm going
to drop in some declarations for the font panel support
and all we really have right here
is the ChangedFont function.
This function is going to be where we're
going to handle events from the font panel,
so we're going to take an event as input and the WindowRef.
We'll respond to this event by setting the font from
the font panel to the ArcView, so let's go ahead
and implement that, jump to the implementation
file and drop in the implementation here.
Now, if those of you familiar with Cocoa you will note
that you use a method very similar to this when responding
to the font panel you'll get a new font
from the font panel and you'll be asked
to convert your current font to that font.
What we're doing here for Core Text in
ChangeFont is, first thing we're going
to do is get the current font out of the ArcView.
Once we have that we will copy the font descriptor
with CTFontCopyFontDescriptor from the current font
and also extract the point size so we can use it
when recreating the font if that hasn't changed.
The next we're going to do is extract the
descriptor, the CT font descriptor from the event --
from the font panel so we'll get event parameter and
the parameter kEventParamCTFontDescriptor,
we will get the font description from the font panel.
Now it's important to note that the font panel
has a lot of different modes and it's possible
that the user only interacted with one of these modes
and possibly only changed one aspect of the font.
So this font descriptor you get from the
font panel could be partially complete
that is the user manipulated the size slider you may only
have a point size in the font descriptor from the font panel
so what you need to do is merge this -- these
new attributes from this new font descriptor
with your current font that's why we
got the current font to begin with.
So the first thing we're going to do is call
CTFontDescriptorCopyAttributes with this new descriptor
from the font panel, that will give us the dictionary of
attributes and Core Text has a very convenient method,
CTFontDescriptorCreateCopyWithAttributes
that takes a basic --
base descriptor, the original descriptor and a set
of a new attributes and will do the proper merge
of those attributes with the existing descriptor.
It will handle the tough work of merging the
more complex attributes like variation settings
and feature settings from the typography panel.
Once we have this new font descriptor
we're pretty much home free.
We will create a new font, CTFontCreateWithFontDescriptor
with this new one and then we will --
we'll specify zero point size and null for the matrix
parameter, basically so that we will preserve the values
that are in the descriptor and so the descriptor came from
a font originally that was merged with the font panel,
so it has everything we need inside of it at this point
we don't want to override any of those because we want
to respect the user selection in the font panel and last we
will set the font to our ArcView and release everything.
The next part of interacting with the font panel is you
need to tell the font panel what the current font is
and it's important to do this so that
the font panel when it's displayed
or when the user switches windows is always
displaying, you know, the correct font.
So I'm going to go to controls.h again and here we're
going to go to the font panel utilities and I'm going
to declare a utility function here,
UpdateFontPanel, this is what we'll call
to update the font panel with the
font for the current ArcView.
Now, if we go to the implementation file and
drop in the implementation, we can see --
take a look through this and see
what UpdateFontPanel actually does.
It's really quite simple, like change font we're
going to get the current font and then the descriptor
from the current font CTFontCopyFontDescriptor again
and then we're going to call SetFontInfoForSelection.
This is the primary mechanism for accessing
the font panel from the Carbon interface.
We'll specify that our selection is a
Core Text type and pass in our descriptor.
Those of you that may have tried this before with the ATSUI
styles and having to build up these fairly large structures
for all the information might be relieved moving to Core
text that it's as easy as passing a descriptor around.
Now the last piece of information that I want you
to note is that the last parameter to SetFontInfoForSelection
is the window event target
of our current window.
This could be the window or could be a control since we're
sort of Windows-based here I'm going to use the window.
It's important to specify this because that tells the
font panel where to send its next selection event to.
If you don't do that, you may not get the selection event
that you need when the user interacts with the font panel.
Last things we're going to hook the events up in our
event handlers, so first I'll drop a new implementation
of HandleNew, all this new implementation really does
and we'll take a quick look is add another two events
that we want to handle here, the WindowActivated and the
FontSelection event and then also we'll update the status
of the font panel so that when we have a new
window it gets -- the font panel gets updated.
So we go to the Window Event Handler and we'll drop in a new
implementation here with the code to handle these events,
save our file and let's take a quick look
at what we're doing with the font events.
So when we get the show/hide font panel event,
all I'm going to do is call update the font panel
so that it knows what Windows sent the event to and what the
current font is, and I'm not going to set the status code
or anything because I don't actually handle the event.
I want the standard event handler to do
that, and we get the selection event,
all I'm going to do is call my change font routine
and that's going to apply the current font.
So if we build and run this now our application is
up and I can bring up the font panel -- excellent.
And I should be able to change the font here, so let's pick
a different font let's try Cochin you see
that the font change is not very clear,
maybe Copperplate, yeah, there we go.
It's always, you know, I can change
the styles and the sizes.
It all updates live, responds to the font events and, if
I open up a new window, you know, it sets the current font
in the new window, switch back, we're good to go.
So before we're done with fonts Ned has a little bit
more to tell you about determining font capabilities
and this is what we're going to
use for hooking up these bold
and italic check boxes you've been
looking at for the past few demos, Ned.
>> Nathan, that was riveting.
>> Slides, please.
Thank you.
>> All right.
So what we've done so far, of course, we've gotten
some drawing in, we've gotten some strings in,
we've gotten some font panel action
in, this has been fantastic.
So I want to go back to rendering
for just a couple of slides here.
So, of course, as I mentioned before
Mac OS X uses Quartz or Core Graphics
as its fundamental graphics mechanism
and Quartz brings a lot to the table.
It's really a great mechanism to work for.
It's resolution independent, it has great PDF, all sorts of
cool shadings and all sorts of stuff I couldn't even begin
to tell you about but there's, and of course, CGFont
is the drawing primitive for dealing with text
and fonts within a Quartz context and -- but there's
a catch. The catch is that if you've been dealing
with raster graphics package or bitmap graphics
package for most of your life as most of us have,
there's a bit of a sea change that you're going to have
to make when you think about fonts in your application.
And that is the notion that not all styles
apply in any particular instance for a font.
So what I mean by this is that when you're dealing
with a raster graphics package like QuickDraw or GDI,
it's really easy to take any font that a user has on
their system and say, oh hey, I want an italic version
of that font and there it goes or hey, I want a
bold version and get this chunky double struck bold,
but Quartz is really founded in the sensibility of PDF
which holds text in very high regard and so we tend
to take the font designer into
account when dealing with fonts.
In particular not all font designers have designed
a particular family with bold and italic instance,
sometimes they might be, you know, in a completely
different font family or maybe there just isn't one,
maybe the design isn't suitable for either of those styles.
So it's important to note both for yourself and
to your users that they can't just arbitrarily go
and apply these styles to just any
font they have on their system.
So as we saw in the last example the font panel makes
this really easy because it lists all of the styles
that are available for a particular font even beyond
simple bold and italic if the font happens to have one,
but you may find there's an instance where you have kind
of this sort of old notion of dealing with the font,
and so you'll find out that you can almost synthesize
an italic for any particular face and you can do
that graphically by applying a shear transform which
is where you turn the rectangle into a parallelogram
and so it doesn't really give you real italic, you know, it
won't give you any sort of change to the design of the font
but it will give you an obliqued graphics
effect for that particular font instance
but bold on the other hand is a different story.
It -- there's no real way to synthesize a bold for a
font that didn't have one in a way that's going to work
in every context that that particular
font instance is going to be used.
That old notion of doing the literal double strike in order
to get the bolder text isn't going to work and so in order
to handle this -- this new world where fonts look
great because they were designed that way rather
than just being kind of mangled by your graphics,
we're going to need to determine what particular fonts have
particular styles or perhaps other traits in some cases
and in this case I'm going to turn it
over to Nathan to show you how to do so.
>> All right.
So back to the demo we're moving on to step five.
We're going to hook up those check boxes and menu items
to make text switch the font to bold and italic faces.
What's important to note is we're going to be analyzing
the capabilities of the font using Core Text to figure
out if these check boxes even apply
for the font we've selected.
So if a font doesn't have an italic face, you know,
moving from the current face, we're
going to disable that check box.
So let's get started here and we're going to be working
in the fonts.h and c and controls.h and c files.
So in fonts.h I want to drop in a couple more utilities
for probing font traits and setting font traits.
So we'll drop those in, two simple functions
here that we're going to be implementing,
ToggleFontTrait and CanToggleFontTrait.
Essentially ToggleFontTrait is just going to
be take the current font and take the font --
the trait that is specified and switch
the meaning of it from the current font.
So, if the font is bold and we want to toggle
bold trait, we're going to make it nonbold
and CanToggleFontTrait is very similar but all it's going
to do is determine whether the font can actually do that.
So let's drop in the implementation for these.
All right.
And we'll take a look at what ToggleFontTrait does
here or right there, first thing we're going to do
as we've done before is get the current font and then
we are going to call CTFont and get symbolic traits.
That will give us the traits that we determine
for the font as a short-bit field, you know,
using bitmask for each trait and this represents things
like bold, italic, monospace and various other things
and then we're going to do a quick set of
code here and we had it broken down into if-else
for readability there are other ways we can do this but
we're going to call CTFontCreateWithSymbolicTraits,
give it our original font and default
values of zero and null for size and matrix.
We don't want to change those and then we're going
to pass in the trait value as the fourth parameter
and the trait mask as the fifth parameter
and, again, like I said these are bitmasks
and so the fifth parameter is important that actually tells
Core Text which trait you desire to modify and it's possible
to modify multiple traits at a time and
the value for those traits will be set
by the values you pass in for the fourth parameter.
So, you know, the first line here that I've highlighted
we're going to be trying to turn on a given trait
and the other call we're trying to
turn off that given trait and so,
once we've done that we will set the font to our ArcView.
If you take a look at CanToggleFontTrait,
the code is pretty much identical.
All it does is take a font as input instead of getting
it from our current ArcView and then it checks to see
if we can actually make a converted
font, and it will toss out the result
but it tells us whether the font can do this or not.
So we move on to controls let's quickly
drop in the controls stuff here,
the control utilities let's put in the declaration.
I just have two utilities here to update the font controls
those are the check boxes and update the format menu
which is the update the menu items, and I'm
going to jump to our implementation file
and put the implementations in the right place.
I'm not really going to walk you through these because
this is standard control functions calls for HIToolbox
but suffice it to say these are calling those two
functions that I provided the ToggleFontTraits
and the CanToggleFontTraits in response to
being called and then update the menu items
and essentially we're just changing
a few attributes on those controls.
All right.
So before this will run we need to, again, update
our event handler, so let's replace update new
and all we're really doing here is making sure we
update the font controls as well as the font panel,
and we drop in our new Window Event Handler, and now I will
show you what we're doing in the Window Event Handler is
when we get the font control commands which we have
defined in the controls.h file for bold and italic,
we're going to toggle the font trait and then
reupdate the controls with the current font
because we've changed the font and
that's all we really need to do.
If we build and run this, you can see
the effect right away -- hide Xcode.
We're starting to look like that app I first showed you.
We got our text drawn in Arc, we got the font
panel integration and if I change the font --
let me bring up the font panel so you can actually
see how things are going here, if I change it to bold,
you can see that since dedo our current
font does not have a bold italic typeface,
we disabled the italic check box
as well as the italic menu item.
Now if I disable bold and switch to italic,
you can see that the reverse happens,
switch to a more complete face say Cochin and now I actually
have access to a bold italic face and once you've got that
and you're giving the proper feedback to
the users for the capabilities of the font.
We're not giving them misconceptions of what fonts
can, you know, that they can do things with fonts
that the fonts actually don't support
and so before I wrap up and show you some
of the option hookup let's have Ned talk
about saving your text into your document.
Slides, please.
>> Thanks.
Nathan. Truly that's better than Cats.
So this is just kind of a quick run down on
saving because by and large we hope that you
as you're designing your document format will consider some
of the existing mechanisms for dealing with saving text but,
if you're implementing a file format of your own, we
certainly strongly recommend that you make use of Unicode.
CF has some conveniences for dealing -- for converting
your text to a version that's appropriate for being saved
in a document, the external representation, of course,
is UTF-16 with a byte order marker that means that,
if you save your document on an Intel machine and open
on a PowerPC that byte order marker will, of course,
be a signal to CFString as to what byte
ordering to use when reading that text back in.
So we do recommend that, if you have the choice, you
make use of this convenience although you may find
that if you're dealing with, you know, documents from
the internet or some other protocol you might need
to also use something like UTF-8 which is
also available to you but do keep that in mind
as a consideration when you're designing document format.
Also and sometimes you may need to use this not just
for documents but perhaps for other purposes as well,
when you are dealing with the style for a particular run of
text, you should make note that we strongly encourage you
to serialize the font descriptor and not the font.
Remember as I said the font descriptor contains the
attributes that describe a font rather than information
about a particular instance of a font and so by serializing
the font descriptor, there's some amount of flexibility
that you have when you're reading that document back in
-- in hopes of providing some sort of reasonable behavior
when a user opens document on a machine that doesn't have
a font that the document was created with for instance
and also it's a lot easier to identify the
information you're going to need to represent a font
because it's all just in the font
descriptor attributes so that's fantastic.
And then as I mentioned at the beginning of this slide
we really do have a ton of functionality available to you
in Mac OS X, in particular available through
Cocoa which allows you to save your text documents
as not only simple formats like RTF but even formats
such as the Open Office format and Office XML and others.
So it's really fabulous technology for dealing with a single
line of code, to save a single line of code, to restore,
it's really great stuff and we encourage you
to make use of that if that fits your needs.
So that's just a quick rundown, there's a lot more
to go into detail here, but we just want to touch
on it being good citizens in Mac OS X.
So now we come to the bonus material.
We thought about director's commentary but we realized there
probably wouldn't be as much there as we might have liked,
so instead we're going to show you how
to hookup those option check boxes.
So no Quentin Tarantino but Nathan will do.
>> Demo one, please.
All right.
So you've been looking at these
option check boxes for a while.
They do some interesting things with
Core Text and since we're a little short
on time I'm going to run through this very quickly.
If you're following along it's step six.
So the first thing I'm going to do declare some options
and some accessors, and I will define them as well
with the option accessors, and then let's,
actually, get to the nuts and bolts.
We're going to look at the drawing here, so
let's first look at what we need to do to get
and draw glyph bounds, so I'll drop in the code for this.
If the option is set, we'll get the image
bounds from the run for the current glyph range,
and we'll simply stroke a rect and
that's pretty straightforward.
All of our graphic operations apply.
Line metrics are almost as easy to do with our run.
We'll call CTRunGetTypographicBounds, and we're going
to get the ascent and descent to use to construct the height
of the box and then again all we have to do
is stroke the rect.
Determining when we have substituted fonts
is a little tricker but not that bad.
If we drop in some code to determine when the substitution
occurs, we will set-up a Boolean we'll use for drawn
and all we're really doing here is extracting
attributes from the run and we want the font attribute
and then we're going to compare with CFEqual our
current ArcView font to this font from the run.
If they're not, well we know we need to draw --
do some special drawing to implement this option.
So to do that I'm going to get rid of the simple run
drawn and implement or substitute glyph drawing and so,
if we're not, we're going to do a simple run drawing
and, if we are, we have to draw manually and we're going
to get the graphics font, the CGFontRef, from -- from
our current font and then simply going to get the glyphs
and the glyph positions from the run and pass those
on to CG to show our glyphs at these positions.
So now the last bit is to hook up the Event Handler,
so I'm going to do that real quick and
drop in the new implementation here.
All this is doing is putting a handler for the commands
from our check boxes and then setting the correct options
to the ArcView and, if I build
and run let's hide Xcode real quick
and you can see now we can dim the substituted glyphs as
I showed before draw glyph bounds and draw line metrics.
All right.
Ned, time to wrap up.
>> All right.
That was great, so, of course, for more information you can
contact Deric Horn the Application Frameworks Evangelist
who can put you in touch with the
right people to resolve your issues.
Under documentation, sample code, and other resources I do
point out the second URL there is the address of the webpage
where you can subscribe to the coretext-dev
public mailing list so if you want to hang
out with other Core Text aficionados that
is the proper venue to do so and, of course,
on the session page for this particular session
there is doc links to the documentation for Core Text
and this sample code and some other stuff.
So that's great, if you want even more in
depth hands on discussions with Nathan,
myself or other Core Text engineers, you
can come to Lab C on Friday afternoon.
There's going to be a lab on Core Text.
I will also point out as I did at the
beginning of this talk there's a talk
on Extending the Cocoa Text System this afternoon,
followed by another Core Text talk geared towards people
who are converting from existing
Mac QuickDraw and ATSUI situations.
So that is fantastic, in summary Unicode is awesome.
We use it throughout the system, you should definitely too.
The way to do so is, of course, to make use of
it and Core Text allows you to make use of that
in a very low level context and, of course, built on
top of this mechanism you have the full flexibility
of the Cocoa text system, so we really
are trying to get you to use Unicode
by making it easy to do so in your application.